clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/modernize/use-designated-initializers.rst, before:

.. title:: clang-tidy - modernize-use-designated-initializers

modernize-use-designated-initializers
=====================================

Finds initializer lists for aggregate types which could be written as designated
initializers instead.

With plain initializer lists, it is very easy to introduce bugs when adding new
fields in the middle of a struct or class type. The same confusion might arise
when changing the order of fields.

C++20 supports the designated initializer syntax for aggregate types. By
applying it, we can always be sure that aggregates are constructed correctly,
because every variable being initialized is referenced by its name.

Example:

.. code-block::

    struct S { int i, j; };

is an aggregate type that should be initialized as

.. code-block::

    S s{.i = 1, .j = 2};

instead of

.. code-block::

    S s{1, 2};

which could easily become an issue when ``i`` and ``j`` are swapped in the
declaration of ``S``.

Even when compiling in a language version older than C++20, depending on your
compiler, designated initializers are potentially supported. Therefore, the
check is not restricted to C++20 and newer versions. Check out the options
``-Wc99-designator`` to get support for mixed designators in initializer list in
C and ``-Wc++20-designator`` for support of designated initializers in older C++
language modes.

Options
-------

.. option::  IgnoreMacros

  The value `false` specifies that components of initializer lists expanded from
  macros are not checked. The default value is `true`.

.. option:: IgnoreSingleElementAggregates

    The value `false` specifies that even initializers for aggregate types with
    only a single element should be checked. The default value is `true`.

.. option:: RestrictToPODTypes

    The value `true` specifies that only Plain Old Data (POD) types shall be
    checked. This makes the check applicable to even older C++ standards. The
    default value is `false`.

Commit message:

[clang-tidy] Extend modernize-use-designated-initializers with new options (#94651)
Add StrictCStandardCompliance and StrictCppStandardCompliance options
that default to true.

Closes #83732

clang-tools-extra/docs/clang-tidy/checks/modernize/use-designated-initializers.rst, after:

.. title:: clang-tidy - modernize-use-designated-initializers

modernize-use-designated-initializers
=====================================

Finds initializer lists for aggregate types which could be written as designated
initializers instead.

With plain initializer lists, it is very easy to introduce bugs when adding new
fields in the middle of a struct or class type. The same confusion might arise
when changing the order of fields.

C++20 supports the designated initializer syntax for aggregate types. By
applying it, we can always be sure that aggregates are constructed correctly,
because every variable being initialized is referenced by its name.

Example:

.. code-block::

    struct S { int i, j; };

is an aggregate type that should be initialized as

.. code-block::

    S s{.i = 1, .j = 2};

instead of

.. code-block::

    S s{1, 2};

which could easily become an issue when ``i`` and ``j`` are swapped in the
declaration of ``S``.

Even when compiling in a language version older than C++20, depending on your
compiler, designated initializers are potentially supported. Therefore, the
check is by default restricted to C99/C++20 and above. Check out the options
``-Wc99-designator`` to get support for mixed designators in initializer list in
C and ``-Wc++20-designator`` for support of designated initializers in older C++
language modes.

Options
-------

.. option::  IgnoreMacros

  The value `false` specifies that components of initializer lists expanded from
  macros are not checked. The default value is `true`.

.. option:: IgnoreSingleElementAggregates

    The value `false` specifies that even initializers for aggregate types with
    only a single element should be checked. The default value is `true`.

.. option:: RestrictToPODTypes

    The value `true` specifies that only Plain Old Data (POD) types shall be
    checked. This makes the check applicable to even older C++ standards. The
    default value is `false`.

.. option:: StrictCStandardCompliance

   When set to `false`, the check will not restrict itself to C99 and above.
   The default value is `true`.

.. option:: StrictCppStandardCompliance

   When set to `false`, the check will not restrict itself to C++20 and above.
   The default value is `true`.
